Are Statistically Significant Feature Interactions
Predictively Useful? A Multi-Outcome, Multi-Model
Empirical Study in Workforce Analytics
Nayan Dhurve
Independent Researcher
Nagpur, Maharashtra, India
nayankdhurve@gmail.com
ORCID: 0009-0005-8051-4988

Data-driven workforce analytics offers a path beyond these
limitations. By systematically analyzing the rich data that organizations already collect—demographics, performance ratings,
tenure patterns, compensation structures, career trajectories—
we can develop a more complete, less biased understanding
of employees.
Most existing work in HR analytics focuses on predicting a
single outcome, most commonly employee attrition [2]. While
valuable, this narrow focus misses the multi-dimensional nature of workforce dynamics and, critically, ignores the role of
interaction effects: the fact that combinations of features often
matter more than individual features in isolation. For example,
tenure may relate to performance differently for managers than
for individual contributors; compensation equity may manifest
differently across departments and demographic groups.
This paper addresses these gaps by investigating four research questions:

Abstract—Feature interactions are widely recognized as important in machine learning, yet their practical utility in workforce
analytics remains unclear. Do statistically significant feature
interactions improve predictive performance, or does their value
lie elsewhere? This paper investigates these questions through an
exhaustive pairwise interaction mining study across 1,755 featurepair combinations, five workforce outcomes, and three model
families—Logistic Regression (LR), Random Forest (RF), and
XGBoost (XGB). We introduce an Interaction Impact Score as a
measurement instrument—combining mutual information (MI),
outcome differential, and segment size—to quantify and rank
interaction strength. All predictive results are reported as 5-fold
cross-validation (CV) means ± standard deviations, with target
leakage explicitly prevented and documented. Our findings reveal
a nuanced picture: strong, statistically significant interactions
exist (the strongest, JobFamily × DepartmentType predicting
PayZone, achieves impact 181.3) and follow a heavy-tailed
Pareto distribution (3.1% of pairs drive 80% of total impact).
However, adding interaction features as explicit predictors does
not provide statistically significant accuracy improvements—
the mean accuracy change is +0.014 ± 0.014 (range 0.000 to
+0.048), and no configuration passes the Wilcoxon signed-rank
test (p < 0.05). We conclude that the primary value of interaction
mining in workforce analytics lies in interpretability—identifying
which feature combinations drive workforce dynamics—rather
than in raw predictive gains. External validation on the IBM
HR dataset shows consistent patterns.
Index Terms—Workforce Analytics, Interaction Mining, Feature Interactions, HR Analytics, Predictive Modeling, SHAP,
XGBoost, Explainable AI

RQ1 Which pairwise feature interactions exhibit statistically
significant associations with workforce outcomes?
RQ2 Do statistically significant interactions improve predictive performance when added as explicit features?
RQ3 How consistent are interaction rankings across independent datasets?
RQ4 Can interaction mining provide organizational insights
independent of predictive gains?

I. I NTRODUCTION

Contributions: This work makes the following contributions:

Human resource decisions fundamentally shape organizational success and failure. Hiring the right person, assigning
them to the right role, understanding why they stay or leave—
these decisions affect everything from productivity to company
culture. Yet traditional HR practices rely heavily on interviewbased assessment, which is susceptible to systematic biases
including extroversion preference, cultural norm alignment,
and confirmation bias [1].
An introverted but technically brilliant candidate may be
overlooked in a Western hiring culture that rewards selfpromotion, while an outspoken candidate may be seen as
disruptive in a culture that values group harmony.

1) Exhaustive interaction scan: Systematic testing of all
1,755 pairwise feature combinations across five workforce outcomes and three model families, providing the
first comprehensive interaction map in HR analytics.
2) Negative-result ablation: Rigorous with/without interaction feature comparison using paired statistical tests
(Wilcoxon and paired t-test), indicating that explicit interaction engineering provides no measurable predictive
benefit for tree-based models.
3) Paradox identification: Discovery and explanation of the
PayZone paradox—the strongest interaction yet nearrandom prediction—and class-imbalance model-family

behavior, providing methodological guidance for practitioners.
4) Practical recommendations: A decision framework for
when interaction mining adds value (exploratory analysis, policy evaluation, hypothesis generation) versus
when it does not (predictive optimization with tree
ensembles).
Hypothesis: We test the hypothesis that statistically significant pairwise feature interactions, when encoded as explicit features, improve predictive performance across multiple workforce prediction tasks compared to models using
only main effects. This hypothesis is evaluated across five
outcomes, three model families, and two datasets.
To answer these questions, we introduce an Interaction
Impact Score as a measurement instrument—combining mutual information, outcome differential, and segment size—and
apply it within a systematic seven-phase pipeline. Our findings
indicate that while the Interaction Impact Score identifies
strong, statistically significant interactions—particularly JobFamily × DepartmentType and Tenure × Exit Quarter (impact
scores exceeding 100)—adding these interactions as explicit
features does not improve predictive accuracy. This reveals
that the value of interaction mining lies in interpretability and
hypothesis generation rather than raw predictive gains.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section II discusses related work. Section III describes our dataset,
pipeline, and methodology. Section IV presents experimental
results. Section V discusses implications and limitations. Section VI concludes and outlines future directions.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. HR Analytics and Predictive Modeling
The field of HR analytics has grown substantially, with
employee attrition prediction being the dominant research
focus. Talebi et al. [2] conducted a systematic review of 62
studies and found that Random Forest is the most frequently
used model, job satisfaction is the single most predictive
feature, and the IBM HR dataset [3] is the most commonly
used benchmark. Most studies report accuracy in the 70–
90% range depending on dataset and methodology. De Vos
et al. [4] reached similar conclusions, noting that ensemble
methods consistently outperform single classifiers for attrition
prediction. Alduayj and Rajpoot [5] showed that gradient
boosting achieves the highest accuracy (87%) on the IBM
dataset, though at the cost of interpretability.
Alyousef et al. [6] proposed a hybrid predictive model
for employee turnover using XGBoost with SHAP (SHapley
Additive exPlanations) interpretability, identifying interaction
between job level and experience as a key attrition driver.
However, like most work in this area, they used SHAP’s
built-in interaction detection post-hoc rather than systematic
pre-model interaction testing. Al Akasheh et al. [7] extended
this by incorporating temporal features and found that tenureinteraction terms improve attrition prediction by 2–4%, consistent with the effect sizes we observe in our study.

B. Interaction Effects in Machine Learning
Feature interactions are recognized as important across
many domains. Friedman and Popescu [8] introduced the
H-statistic, a model-agnostic measure that decomposes prediction variance into main and interaction effects. Lou et
al. [9] developed GA2 M, which explicitly models pairwise
interactions within a Generalized Additive Model framework,
achieving both accuracy and intelligibility. Caruana et al. [10]
showed the practical value of interaction-aware models in
healthcare, where pairwise interactions improved pneumonia
risk prediction.
Tree-based models naturally capture interactions through
their hierarchical splitting structure. Breiman’s Random Forest
[11] and Chen and Guestrin’s XGBoost [12] implicitly model
interactions without explicit feature engineering. However,
Sorokina et al. [13] showed that tree ensembles can reliably
detect additive interactions when explicitly tested, motivating
systematic interaction search strategies. Lundberg and Lee [14]
extended their SHAP framework to pairwise interaction values
[15], enabling post-hoc interaction detection within tree-based
models. Tsang et al. [16] introduced neural interaction detection (NID), which extracts interaction effects from trained
neural networks.
C. Why Existing Interaction Detection Methods Are Insufficient
Existing methods for detecting feature interactions each
address a subset of desiderata, but no single method satisfies all requirements for systematic pre-model interaction
mining. We identify five criteria essential for this task: (C1)
model-agnostic—computable before any model training; (C2)
nonlinear—detecting non-product-moment dependencies; (C3)
quantitative—producing a ranked impact metric, not just a
significance decision; (C4) multi-outcome—scalable across
prediction targets; (C5) significance-aware—with built-in statistical testing. Table I evaluates existing methods against these
criteria.
TABLE I
C OMPARISON OF INTERACTION DETECTION METHODS ACROSS FIVE
CRITERIA FOR SYSTEMATIC PRE - MODEL MINING .

Method
Free Nonlin. Metric Multi Sig.
Pearson corr.
Yes
No
No
Yes Yes
Mutual Info.
Yes
Yes
No
Yes No
χ2 test
Yes
Yes
No
Yes Yes
SPEARMINT [13] Yes
Yes
No
Part. Yes
SHAP inter. [15]
No
Yes
Yes
Dep. No
H-statistic [8]
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Impact Score
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes Yes

Pearson correlation detects only linear (product-moment)
dependencies. Workforce interactions—e.g., JobFamily × DepartmentType predicting PayZone—are inherently categorical
and nonlinear, making Pearson undetectable for the strongest
signals we discover.

Mutual Information (MI) captures nonlinear dependence
but provides no ranking metric beyond the raw MI value,
which conflates dependence strength with feature entropy and
lacks any sample-size penalty. MI alone places TenureYears ×
TenureVsAvg (MI=4.30) above JobFamily × DepartmentType
(MI=0.60) in our data, despite the latter having far greater
practical significance.
χ2 and ANOVA tests provide significance decisions but
no unified impact metric. A χ2 of 1423 (our top pair) and
a χ2 of 1000 (our third-ranked pair) are both astronomically
significant (p < 10−100 ), yet the test statistic alone cannot
distinguish which interaction has greater practical impact.
The Impact Score resolves this by weighting significance by
outcome differential and segment size.
SHAP interaction values are model-specific by
construction—they require a trained model and reflect
prediction decomposition rather than population-level
association. In our comparison, SHAP and the Impact Score
show only moderate rank correlation (Spearman ρ = 0.536),
because SHAP emphasizes model-internal dynamics (e.g.,
TenureDays × TenureVsAvg as the top SHAP pair) while
the Impact Score captures broader cross-feature associations.
SHAP also scales poorly: computing SHAP interaction
values for all 1,755 pairs across 3 models is computationally
prohibitive.
The H-statistic is model-agnostic but computationally expensive (O(N ·p2 ·B) with B bootstrap iterations) and provides
per-pair rather than per-outcome rankings. Computing H for
all 1,755 pairs against 5 outcomes is impractical.

duce bias into employment interviews, including extroversion
preference, cultural similarity, and physical attractiveness.
Mehrabi et al. [19] provide a comprehensive taxonomy
of bias sources in machine learning pipelines, distinguishing
between data-driven, algorithmic, and human-induced biases.
Hardt et al. [20] formalized equality of opportunity as a fairness metric, which is particularly relevant for HR applications
where false positives (incorrectly flagging an employee as
high-risk) and false negatives carry different costs.
Our work connects to this literature by showing how datadriven capability assessment—grounded in systematic interaction mining—can reduce reliance on interview-only evaluation, potentially mitigating bias. We further discuss ethical
safeguards in Section V. In summary, existing work has established the value of feature interactions in specific ML contexts
but has not provided a generalizable, task-agnostic framework
for discovering high-impact interactions in workforce data
across multiple outcomes.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Dataset
We use a workforce dataset of 3,000 synthetic employee
records with 26 raw columns covering demographics, employment history, job characteristics, performance, and termination
details. The data is synthetic (simulated) and does not contain
real employee information—a transparent limitation that also
ensures reproducibility and avoids privacy concerns.
From the 26 raw columns, we engineer 27 additional
features during Phase 2 of our pipeline, resulting in 53 total
features. Table II summarizes the feature categories.

D. The Gap: Systematic Interaction Mining in HR
While interaction detection methods are well-established
in the ML literature, their application in HR analytics has
been piecemeal. Most papers either ignore interactions entirely
or rely on model-specific post-hoc detection (e.g., SHAP
interaction values from a single XGBoost model). No existing
work performs an exhaustive systematic scan of all pairwise
interactions across multiple outcomes and models, which is
the gap our paper addresses. Furthermore, existing studies
typically examine a single outcome (most often attrition),
missing the multi-outcome nature of workforce dynamics.
This leaves open the central question we investigate: whether
statistically significant interactions in workforce data translate
into predictive utility or serve primarily interpretive purposes.

TABLE II
F EATURE CATEGORIES AND COUNTS USED IN INTERACTION MINING .
Category
Demographics
Tenure & Employment

Role & Hierarchy
Compensation & Diversity
Temporal
Performance
Raw (nominal)

Count Examples
4 Age, Generation, CareerStage
6 TenureYears,
TenureVsAvg,
IsLongTenure
10 SeniorityLevel, JobFamily, IsManager
4 PayEquityRatio,
IntersectionalID
4 StartYear, ExitQuarter
3 PerfScore, EngagementFlag
26 Title, DepartmentType,
GenderCode

E. Fairness and Bias in HR Analytics
A growing body of work examines fairness and bias in algorithmic HR systems. Fabris et al. [1] provide a comprehensive
survey of bias in algorithmic hiring, covering bias sources,
detection methods, and mitigation strategies. Sony et al. [17]
examine discrimination risks embedded in AI-driven HR tools,
identifying three high-risk categories: data bias (skewed training data), algorithmic bias (model architecture choices), and
deployment bias (misapplication of predictions). Wingate et al.
[18] identify six high-risk applicant characteristics that intro-

Table II summarizes the feature categories. Our analysis
targets five outcome variables spanning workforce dynamics:
• is terminated (binary): whether the employee’s status
contains “Terminated”
• PayZone (3-class): compensation zone assignment (Zone
A/B/C)
• is minority dept (binary): for each department, whether
the employee’s gender is the minority gender in that
department

PerfScore (multiclass): current employee performance
rating
• SeniorityLevel (multiclass): derived career seniority score
from the feature engineering phase
Of these, is terminated and is minority dept are binary
outcomes for which Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC)
can be reported; PayZone is a 3-class ordinal target; and
PerfScore and SeniorityLevel are engineered features. Target
leakage pathways for all outcomes are explicitly identified and
excluded (see §3.6).
•

B. Seven-Phase Pipeline
Our analysis follows a seven-phase pipeline (Figure 1):
Phase 1 – Deep EDA: Univariate distributions, missing
patterns, outlier detection (IQR, Z-score, Isolation Forest consensus), PCA, t-SNE, and silhouette analysis.
Phase 2 – Feature Engineering: Derivation of 27 features
from the 26 raw columns, creating a total feature space of 53
dimensions.
Phase 3 – Interaction Mining: The core contribution—
systematic testing of all pairwise feature interactions against
each outcome.
Phase 4 – Predictive Models: Training and evaluation of
three model families with and without interaction features.
Phase 5 – Deep Dives: For top discoveries, detailed analysis
including subgroup comparison, profile characterization, and
what-if simulation.
Phase 6 – Dashboards: Composite visualization integrating
all prior phases.
Phase 7 – HTML Report: Standalone report with all 60
figures and structured sections.
C. Interaction Impact Score
We introduce a proposed metric, the Interaction Impact
Score, to quantify the strength of each pairwise interaction:
Impact = I(X; Y ) × |∆outcome | × log(nseg )

(1)

where I(X; Y ) is the mutual information, |∆outcome | is
the absolute outcome differential, and log(nsegment ) is the
logarithmic sample-size weight. Concretely:
XX
p(x, y)
I(X; Y ) =
p(x, y) log
p(x)p(y)
x
y
|∆outcome | = | mean(O | X = x, Y = y) − mean(O)|
This score combines three essential aspects: statistical dependence (mutual information), practical significance (outcome differential), and reliability (sample size). It is modelagnostic and can be computed before any model training.
1) Theoretical Justification: The multiplicative formulation
in Equation 1 is justified by the following properties:
• Zero-component property: If any component is zero, the
entire score is zero. A pair with zero mutual information
conveys no statistical dependence regardless of outcome
differential; a pair with zero outcome differential is
practically irrelevant regardless of statistical dependence;

a singleton segment (n = 1) is unreliable regardless of
either factor.
• Monotonicity: The score increases monotonically with
each component, a necessary property for ranking—
stronger dependence, larger outcome gaps, and bettersupported segments consistently receive higher scores.
• Logarithmic sample-size penalty: The log(n) term ensures diminishing returns from additional samples: doubling a small segment (10 → 20) increases the weight
by log(20/10) ≈ 0.69, while doubling a large segment
(1000 → 2000) adds only log(2000/1000) ≈ 0.69—the
same absolute increase but proportionally smaller relative
impact. This prevents large but homogeneous segments
from dominating while still rewarding adequate statistical
support.
• Unitless ranking: The score has no natural units and is
designed for relative comparison, not absolute interpretation. The magnitude is meaningful only within a single
study context.
We compare this multiplicative formulation against two alternatives in ablation experiments: an additive variant (Sadd =
z(MI)+z(|∆|)+z(log n)) and a statistic-only variant (ranking
by raw χ2 or F ). The multiplicative formulation produces
Spearman correlations of ρ ≈ 0.5 − 0.7 with the ensemble
variant depending on outcome, indicating that the product form
captures joint contributions more effectively than any single
component alone.

We test all 27
= 351 pairwise combinations among the
2
27 features produced by Phase 2 (feature engineering) against
each of the 5 outcomes, yielding 351 × 5 = 1,755 total tests.
Phase-1 raw columns are excluded to avoid testing trivial or
redundant interactions with the engineered features derived
from them.
Empirical Properties: Across all 1,755 tests, Impact Scores
range from 0 to 181.3 with a heavy-tailed distribution (mean
2.16, median ¡0.001): 83.5% of pairs have near-zero impact (<
0.01). Of the 336 Bonferroni-significant pairs, scores span 0.00
to 181.3 with a median of 0.12. The score properties—zerocomponent behavior, monotonicity, and logarithmic penalty—
are verified through implementation tests: no pair with zero
mutual information achieves non-zero impact, and the ranking
is stable across outcomes (mean Spearman ρ = 0.72 between
outcome-specific rankings). These properties indicate that the
Impact Score provides a reliable, model-agnostic ranking suitable for pre-screening interaction candidates before predictive
modeling.
2) Formal Properties: We establish the formal mathematical properties of the Interaction Impact Score. Let X , Y, O
be discrete random variables representing two features and
an outcome, with joint distribution p(x, y, o). Define segment
Sij = {(x, y) : X = xi , Y = yj } with cardinality nij .
Proposition 1 (Positivity): For any feature pair (X, Y ) and
outcome O, Impact(X, Y → O) ≥ 0, with equality iff any of
the following hold: (a) I(X; Y ) = 0, (b) ∆outcome = 0 for all
segments, or (c) nij ≤ 1 for all segments Sij .

Fig. 1. Seven-phase interaction mining pipeline. From data ingestion through feature engineering, interaction mining, predictive modeling, and HTML report
generation.

Proof. I(X; Y ) ≥ 0 by Gibbs’ inequality, with equality iff
X ⊥ Y . |∆outcome | ≥ 0 by construction. log(nij ) ≥ 0 for
nij ≥ 1, with log(1) = 0. Since each factor is non-negative,
their product is non-negative. Zero occurs iff any factor is zero
for all segments, corresponding to conditions (a)–(c).
■
Proposition 2 (Monotonicity): The Impact Score is monotonically non-decreasing in each component: for fixed values
of the other two components, increasing I(X; Y ), |∆outcome |,
or log(nij ) cannot decrease the score.
Proof. The score is a product of non-negative factors. For
∂
a, b, c ≥ 0, ∂a
(a · b · c) = bc ≥ 0, and similarly for b and
c. Thus each partial derivative is non-negative, establishing
monotonicity.
■
Proposition 3 (Boundedness): For N records, K outcome
classes, and feature pair (X, Y ) with |X| ≤ |Y |,
0 ≤ Impact(X, Y → O)
≤ log N · max[H(O) − H(O | X, Y )] · log N

for a metric used in exploratory data analysis. The proofs are
concise but provide the theoretical foundation absent from adhoc scoring approaches.
D. Statistical Testing
For each feature pair, we apply the appropriate statistical
test:
P
2
• Categorical × Categorical: Chi-square test, χ =
(O−
E)2 /E
• Categorical × Numeric: ANOVA F-test, F
=
M Sbetween /M Swithin
• Numeric × Numeric: Pearson correlation, r
=
cov(X, Y )/(σX σY )
Multiple comparison correction is applied using the Bonferroni method (αcorrected = 0.05/1755). This testing framework
ensures statistically robust interaction detection across diverse
feature-type combinations.

o

where H(O) ≤ log K is the outcome entropy.
Proof. I(X; Y ) ≤ min(H(X), H(Y )) ≤ log N .
|∆outcome | ≤ maxo P (o) − mino P (o) ≤ 1. log(nij ) ≤ log N .
The product of these upper bounds yields the stated inequality.
The tighter bound uses I(X; Y ) ≤ I(X; Y | O) ≤ H(O) −
H(O | X, Y ).
■
Proposition 4 (Scale Invariance): The Impact Score is
invariant under monotonic bijective transformations of feature
values: if f : X → X ′ and g : Y → Y ′ are bijections, then
Impact(X, Y → O) = Impact(f (X), g(Y ) → O).
Proof. Mutual information is invariant under bijections:
I(X; Y ) = I(f (X); g(Y )). The segment partition {Sij }
under (X, Y ) maps bijectively to {Si′′ j ′ } under (f (X), g(Y )),
preserving segment cardinalities and outcome distributions.
Thus |∆| and log(n) are unchanged.
■
These properties establish that the Impact Score is a wellbehaved ranking function satisfying the minimal requirements

E. Models and Evaluation
Three model families are trained for each of the five
outcomes:
=
2000,
• Logistic
Regression:
max iter
class weight=’balanced’, L2 penalty
• Random Forest: 200 trees, balanced class weight
• XGBoost: 200 estimators, max depth = 4, subsample =
0.8
Each model is trained twice: once without interaction
features (baseline) and once with interaction features added.
Models are evaluated using 5-fold stratified cross-validation,
with accuracy, F1 score, and ROC-AUC reported as mean ±
standard deviation across folds. After CV, a final model is
trained on all data for SHAP analysis and feature importance
extraction. SHAP analysis [14] is applied to the XGBoost
model for interpretability. Survival analysis uses Kaplan-Meier
estimation and Cox Proportional Hazards modeling via the

lifelines library [21]. This dual-training design isolates the
marginal predictive contribution of interaction features across
model families.
F. Target Leakage Prevention
A critical methodological concern in interaction mining
pipelines is target leakage—when the feature matrix inadvertently contains information derived from the target variable.
During initial development, we identified three leakage pathways that produced artificially inflated accuracy:
• PerfScore self-prediction: When predicting PerfScore,
the PerfScore column itself was included as a feature,
producing 99.9% accuracy. The fix excludes the target
column from the feature matrix when its name matches
a feature column.
• SeniorityLevel derived features: The columns IsExecutive and IsIC are deterministically derived from SeniorityLevel, creating an indirect leakage pathway. The fix
excludes all three columns (SeniorityLevel, IsExecutive,
IsIC) when predicting SeniorityLevel.
• Termination post-hoc columns: ExitYear and ExitQuarter
partially encode termination status (active employees
have missing exit dates). The fix excludes these columns
when predicting is terminated.
All results in this paper reflect the corrected pipeline.
The most impacted outcomes are PerfScore (accuracy
dropped from 0.999 to 0.739) and SeniorityLevel (1.000 to
0.946), while termination and minority-department predictions
changed negligibly (<0.01), indicating these were genuine
leakage effects rather than general pipeline errors. This correction is documented in the reproducibility checklist and
enforced by a _LEAKAGE_EXCLUDE dictionary in the opensource codebase.
G. Deep Dive Methodology
For each top discovery, we perform three analyses:
1) Subgroup Analysis: Compare the interaction segment to
the rest of the population using Cohen’s d effect size
and two-sample t-test
2) Profile Characterization: Compare mean feature values
between segment and population to identify distinguishing characteristics
3) What-If Simulation: For numeric features, compute expected outcome across multiple percentile values (p5,
p25, p50, p75, p95) with confidence bands
H. Algorithm: Interaction Mining Pipeline
Algorithm 1 describes the end-to-end interaction mining
pipeline. Algorithm 2 defines the Impact Score computation.
Algorithm 1: Interaction Mining Pipeline
Require: Dataset D, feature set F, outcome set O
Ensure: Ranked interaction list R
• F ′ ← EngineerFeatures(F)
(Phase 2)

F′
• P ← 2 (351 pairwise combinations)
•R←∅

for each outcome o ∈ O do
for each pair p = (fi , fj ) ∈ P do
• s ← ComputeImpact(p, o, D) (Algorithm 2)
• pval ← StatisticalTest(p, o, D)
• sig ← (pval < αbonferroni )
• R ← R ∪ {(p, o, s, pval, sig)}
end for
end for
• R ← SortByImpact(R)
return R

Algorithm 2: Impact Score Computation
Require: Feature pair (X, Y ), outcome O, dataset
D with N records
Ensure: Impact score S
• Discretize X, Y if numeric
• Compute PXY : contingency table (joint
distribution p(x, y))
P P
(x,y)
• I ← x y PXY (x, y) log PPXXY
(x)PY (y) (MI)
• µO ← Mean(O) (population outcome mean)
• ∆max ← 0
for each segment Sij where X = xi , Y = yj do
• nij ← |Sij |; if nij < 2, skip
• µij ← Mean(O | Sij )
• ∆ij ← |µij − µO |
• if ∆ij > ∆max : ∆max ← ∆ij
end for
• S ← I × ∆max × log(N )
return S

I. Computational Complexity
Table III compares the time and space complexity of the
Impact Score against alternative interaction detection methods.
The Impact Score is computed in O(N · p2 · K) where N is
the number of records, p is the number of features, and K
is the number of outcomes. In practice, scanning all 1,755
pairs across 5 outcomes completes in under 30 seconds on a
standard CPU workstation.
TABLE III
C OMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY OF INTERACTION DETECTION METHODS .
N : RECORDS , p: FEATURES , K: OUTCOMES , T : TREES , D: DEPTH , B:
BOOTSTRAP ITERS .

Method
Time
Pearson corr.
O(N p2 )
Mutual Info.
O(N p2 )
2
χ / ANOVA
O(N p2 )
SHAP inter. [15] O(T DN p2 )
H-statistic [8]
O(N p2 B)
Impact Score
O(N p2 K)

Space
O(p2 )
O(p2 )
O(p2 )
O(p2 )
O(p2 )
O(p2 )

The Impact Score matches the asymptotic complexity of the
simplest methods (Pearson, MI, χ2 ) while providing strictly

more information. The key advantage is practical: scanning all
1,755 pairs requires seconds rather than the hours needed for
SHAP or H-statistic computation at scale.
IV. R ESULTS
A. Interaction Mining Results
Of the 1,755 pairwise tests conducted across five outcomes,
512 were significant at α = 0.05 and 336 remained significant
after Bonferroni correction. Table IV presents selected highimpact interaction pairs ranked by our Interaction Impact
Score.
TABLE IV
T OP 10 INTERACTION DISCOVERIES RANKED BY I NTERACTION I MPACT
S CORE .

Rank Feature 1
1
JobFamily
2
JobFamily
3
IntersectionalID
4
SeniorityLevel
5
JobFamily
6
TenureYears
7
IsManager
8
TenureVsAvg
9
JobFamily
10
SeniorityLevel

Feature 2
DepartmentType
IntersectionalID
GenderCode
IsIC
IsManager
ExitQuarter
IsIC
ExitQuarter
IsIC
IsManager

Outcome
PayZone
PayZone
PayZone
PayZone
PayZone
Minority Dept
Minority Dept
Minority Dept
PayZone
PayZone

Impact
181.3
153.7
127.3
125.4
108.0
107.7
107.3
107.1
89.3
71.2

The top discovery—JobFamily × DepartmentType predicting PayZone—achieved an impact score of 181.3 (χ2 =
1423.09, p < 10−301 , mutual information = 0.60). This shows
that compensation zone is strongly associated with the combination of job family and department, more than either alone.
These rankings address RQ1 by identifying which pairwise
interactions exhibit the strongest statistical associations.
1) The PayZone Paradox: A particularly instructive finding
is the PayZone prediction task, which reveals an important
nuance in interpreting Interaction Impact Scores. The top
interaction (JobFamily × DepartmentType) achieves an impact
score of 181.3—the strongest in this study—yet all models
predict PayZone at near-chance levels (RF accuracy 0.328
± 0.017 vs. 3-class random baseline 0.333, majority-class
baseline 0.354). This creates a paradox: how can the strongest
discovered interaction correspond to the weakest predictive
performance?
The resolution lies in the distinction between populationlevel association and individual-level classification. The Impact Score measures distributional deviation: the degree to
which outcome rates differ across interaction segments. With
n = 3000 records, even modest deviations reach statistical
significance (χ2 = 1423, p < 10−301 ). However, classification requires deterministic or near-deterministic assignment—
a given JobFamily×DepartmentType combination should map
consistently to a single PayZone.
Our investigation reveals that of 23 JobFamily × DepartmentType combinations with sufficient support (n ≥ 5), zero
show deterministic PayZone assignment. Every combination

spans all three zones with near-uniform probability. The interaction is thus probabilistic—it describes population-level differences in zone distributions—not deterministic. The Impact
Score correctly identifies it as the strongest interaction in the
dataset, but this strength reflects distributional differences at
scale, not predictive power for individuals.
This finding has a practical implication: interaction mining is valuable for understanding population-level dynamics
(e.g., “which department-family combinations have atypical
compensation distributions?”), but the resulting interactions
should not be expected to improve individual-level prediction.
The two goals—interpretability and prediction—are distinct
and may not align.
2) Termination Class-Imbalance Behavior in Tree Ensembles: A second instructive observation concerns model family behavior under class imbalance. The termination rate is
12.9% (majority-class baseline 87.1%). Logistic Regression
with balanced class weights achieves recall of 0.80 on the
minority class, while Random Forest and XGBoost—both also
configured with balanced weights—achieve recall of only 0.15
and 0.10 respectively.
Although balanced weighting was enabled for all models,
its effect differs across families. In Logistic Regression, class
weights directly shift the decision boundary toward the minority class. In tree ensembles, weights influence impurity-based
split selection but do not adjust the final voting threshold,
producing conservative predictions on the minority class given
shallow trees (max depth=4) and low prevalence. The result is
a textbook tradeoff: RF and XGB achieve higher overall accuracy (0.853, 0.852) by correctly classifying the majority class,
while LR achieves lower accuracy (0.718) but substantially
higher recall (0.80).
This finding has practical implications: practitioners using
tree ensembles for imbalanced HR prediction tasks should
evaluate minority-class metrics alongside overall accuracy, and
should consider post-hoc threshold calibration if recall is the
operational priority.
3) Quantitative Ranking Benchmark: To directly answer
the question of whether the Impact Score provides a ranking
distinct from existing interaction measures, we compare rankings across four methods: MI-only, χ2 statistic-only, SHAP interaction values, and the Friedman H-statistic. Table V presents
Spearman rank correlations and top-10 Jaccard overlaps across
the PayZone outcome.
TABLE V
R ANKING COMPARISON : S PEARMAN ρ ( LOWER ) AND TOP -10 JACCARD
( UPPER ) FOR THE PAY Z ONE OUTCOME .

Impact MI
χ2
SHAP
Impact
—
0.000 0.333
—
MI
0.221
—
0.111
—
χ2
0.784 0.153
—
—
SHAP 0.536
—
—
—

The Impact Score and χ2 -only rankings show strong agreement (ρ = 0.784), because the χ2 statistic is a key input to the

Impact Score via statistical testing. However, the Impact Score
diverges substantially from MI-only rankings (ρ = 0.221,
top-10 Jaccard = 0.0), confirming that MI by itself ranks
interactions differently than the combined metric. MI alone
prioritizes high-entropy feature pairs (e.g., TenureYears ×
TenureVsAvg, MI = 4.30) that have little practical outcome
association, while the Impact Score’s outcome differential
weighting corrects this.
Comparing the Impact Score to SHAP interaction values
on the termination outcome yields a Spearman correlation of
ρ = 0.536—moderate alignment that indicates complementary
perspectives. SHAP’s top pairs are tenure-tenure interactions
(TenureDays × TenureVsAvg, SHAP strength 5.88) that reflect
model-internal dynamics, while the Impact Score’s top pairs
are broader cross-feature associations (Region × IntersectionalID, Impact 55.78). The H-statistic correlates with Impact
Score at ρ = 0.5 (limited to 3 computed pairs).
These results demonstrate that the Impact Score captures
interaction information distinct from any single existing measure, combining the statistical rigor of χ2 testing with the
practical weighting of outcome differential and segment size—
which no existing method does simultaneously.

Fig. 2. Pareto distribution of cumulative interaction impact across feature
pairs. The top 3.1% of interactions (54 of 1,755) account for 80% of total
impact.

B. Ablation and Pareto Analysis
To quantify the concentration of interaction effects, we perform a Pareto analysis of the 1,755 Interaction Impact Scores.
Table IV shows the top-ranked pairs. The distribution is highly
skewed: the top 3 pairs (0.2%) account for 12% of total
cumulative impact, the top 24 pairs (1.4%) account for 50%,
and the top 54 pairs (3.1%) account for 80% (Figure 2), and
the log-log distribution confirms heavy-tailed concentration
(Figure 3). Among the five outcomes, SeniorityLevel shows
the strongest concentration (top 7 pairs reach 80% of its
outcome-specific impact), while is minority dept is the most
diffuse (top 16 pairs).
This Pareto structure—a small fraction of interactions driving the majority of explanatory power—is consistent across all
five outcomes and mirrors findings in other high-dimensional
interaction domains [13]. Practically, this means that a targeted analysis of the top 20–50 interaction pairs captures
the overwhelming majority of actionable insights, suggesting
that exhaustive 1,755-pair scans are unnecessary in production
deployments.
A secondary ablation compares model performance with
vs. without the top interaction features added (Table VI). The
mean accuracy change from interaction features is +0.014 ±
0.014 across 12 configurations, with a maximum of +0.048
(Minority Dept LR). However, no configuration passes the
Wilcoxon signed-rank test at p < 0.05, and only 6 of 12
reach significance under a paired t-test (driven by small CV
variance). Crucially, the largest improvements occur in Logistic Regression (the simplest model), while tree-based models
show near-zero changes. Tree-based models already capture
interactions internally through hierarchical splitting, making
explicit interaction engineering redundant for prediction. The
practical implication is that HR analytics practitioners using

Fig. 3. Log-log histogram of Interaction Impact Scores across all 1,755 pairs.
The heavy-tailed distribution confirms that most pairs have near-zero impact
while a small minority dominate.

tree-based ensembles should focus feature engineering effort
on main effects and data quality rather than interaction construction.
C. Predictive Model Comparison
Table VI compares model performance across outcomes
with and without interaction features. Outcomes span a difficulty spectrum: is terminated and is minority dept are binary tasks with AUC reported; PayZone is a 3-class ordinal
target; PerfScore and SeniorityLevel are multiclass engineered
features. All results reflect the leakage-free pipeline (see §3.6).
Key observations:

TABLE VI
5- FOLD CV MODEL PERFORMANCE ( MEAN ± STD ; 95% BOOTSTRAP CI S
IN S UPPLEMENTARY ).
Outcome
Model
Binary outcomes
Termination
LR
RF
XGB
Minority Dept

LR
RF
XGB

Multiclass outcomes
PayZone
LR
RF
PerfScore

LR
RF

SeniorityLevel

LR
RF

Var.

Acc

F1

AUC

base
+int
base
+int
base
+int
base
+int
base
+int
base
+int

0.718±0.014
0.734±0.018
0.853±0.007
0.853±0.009
0.852±0.001
0.854±0.005
0.503±0.025
0.551±0.019
0.588±0.009
0.595±0.012
0.618±0.019
0.627±0.011

0.421±0.021
0.440±0.029
0.201±0.036
0.227±0.040
0.142±0.037
0.160±0.034
0.503±0.025
0.458±0.014
0.407±0.014
0.420±0.013
0.398±0.018
0.398±0.013

0.800±0.020
0.806±0.025
0.836±0.021
0.848±0.018
0.835±0.018
0.845±0.017
0.549±0.026
0.560±0.016
0.564±0.009
0.581±0.006
0.595±0.019
0.606±0.012

base
+int
base
+int
base
+int
base
+int
base
+int
base
+int

0.303±0.015
0.304±0.011
0.328±0.017
0.339±0.009
0.281±0.028
0.313±0.020
0.739±0.006
0.745±0.005
0.830±0.014
0.851±0.012
0.946±0.005
0.967±0.004

0.299±0.014
0.302±0.011
0.327±0.017
0.339±0.009
0.360±0.034
0.392±0.026
0.687±0.005
0.693±0.003
0.888±0.008
0.899±0.010
0.940±0.005
0.966±0.004

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

XGBoost trained only for binary outcomes. Bold = best baseline
accuracy. Leakage-free (§3.6).

Interactions do not provide statistically significant improvements. Across 12 model-outcome configurations,
the mean accuracy change from adding interaction features is +0.014 ± 0.014 (range: 0.000 to +0.048). While
some configurations show positive point estimates, no
configuration passes the more conservative Wilcoxon
signed-rank test at p < 0.05, and the effect sizes that
reach significance under a paired t-test (6 of 12) are
driven by small CV variance rather than large mean
shifts. This indicates that explicit interaction engineering
provides no measurable predictive benefit when treebased models already capture interactions internally.
• Tree-based models produce comparable results. Random
Forest and XGBoost achieve similar termination accuracy
(0.853 ± 0.007 vs. 0.852 ± 0.001, AUC 0.836 ± 0.021 vs.
0.835 ± 0.018), with differences well within one crossvalidation standard deviation. Random Forest leads on
PerfScore (0.739 ± 0.006) and SeniorityLevel (0.946 ±
0.005).
• Simple models benefit most from interactions. Logistic
Regression shows the largest accuracy improvements
from interaction features (Termination: +0.016, Minority
Dept: +0.048), suggesting that linear models benefit
from explicit interaction engineering more than treebased models—consistent with the hypothesis that trees
already capture interactions internally.

•

Target leakage was properly excluded. After correcting
three leakage pathways (§3.6), PerfScore and SeniorityLevel predictions are no longer artificially perfect
(0.739 and 0.946, respectively), underscoring the importance of rigorous leakage prevention.
• SHAP analysis identifies TenureDays, StartYear, and
TenureVsAvg as the top drivers of termination risk,
followed by tenure-derived features (Figure 4). The ROC
curves in Figure 5 show that interaction features produce
near-identical performance.
• SHAP interaction values (available in supplementary
materials) reveal the strongest pairwise interactions
in the XGBoost termination model. The top pairs—
(TenureDays, TenureVsAvg), (TenureDays, TenureYears),
and (Age, TenureDays)—are all tenure-related, indicating
that termination risk is primarily driven by tenure dynamics rather than demographic or role-based interactions.
This provides a model-based complement to the Impact
Score ranking, which identifies broader cross-feature interactions across all five outcomes.
Collectively, these results address our four research questions: (RQ1) significant pairwise interactions exist across all
five outcomes; (RQ2) adding them as explicit features does
not improve prediction; (RQ3) rankings show moderate crossdataset consistency; and (RQ4) interaction mining provides
organizational insights independent of predictive gains.
•

D. Per-Class Error Analysis
Beyond aggregate metrics, understanding which classes
each model fails on is critical for deployment decisions.
Table VII breaks down per-class precision, recall, F1, and FNR
(false negative rate) for the termination outcome.
TABLE VII
P ER - CLASS ERROR ANALYSIS FOR TERMINATION PREDICTION .

Model Class Prec. Recall F1
FNR
LR
Maj. 0.959 0.707 0.814 0.293
Min. 0.287 0.796 0.421 0.204
RF
Maj. 0.883 0.958 0.919 0.042
Min. 0.337 0.145 0.203 0.855
XGB Maj. 0.878 0.964 0.919 0.036
Min. 0.285 0.096 0.143 0.904

The asymmetry is stark: LR misses only 20% of terminating
employees (FNR = 0.204) while XGBoost misses 90%. However, LR triggers 7.9x more false positives (767 vs. 93 for
XGB). The practical choice depends on context: for retention
intervention programs where false positives carry coaching
costs, XGBoost’s precision may be preferable; for high-risk
screening where false negatives are dangerous, LR’s recall
is superior. This tradeoff persists regardless of interaction
features, which do not materially change per-class behavior.
E. Confidence Intervals and Statistical Precision
All reported metrics include bootstrap 95% confidence
intervals from 1,000 resamples of the 5-fold CV results. For

F. Deep Dive Analysis
The deep dive analysis reveals fine-grained insights into the
top interaction segments. Table VIII summarizes effect sizes
for the five analyzed segments.
TABLE VIII
D EEP DIVE EFFECT SIZES FOR TOP DISCOVERED SEGMENTS .
Segment
Outcome
∆
Effect Size
p-value
Admin. × Sales
PayZone
+0.33 0.40 (medium)
0.057
Tenure × Exit Q4
Minority Dept −
0.60 (medium)
0.005
Leadership × Non-mgr Seniority
+1.8
4.28 (large)
< 0.001
Termination
+0.24 0.72 (medium)
0.048
NE × M Whi Soft
NE × Admin Offices
PerfScore
+0.09
0.16 (small)
0.255

Notable findings include the Leadership non-manager segment (SeniorityLevel 4.0 vs. 2.2 population mean, d = 4.28,
p < 0.001), indicating a distinct career path for experienced
individual contributors; the Tenure × Exit Quarter interaction
predicting minority-department status (d = 0.60, p = 0.005),
suggesting systematic sorting by tenure patterns; and the
Northeast white male soft-skilled segment showing elevated
termination risk (∆ = +0.24, d = 0.72, p = 0.048), revealing
an intersectional vulnerability pattern. Together, these deepdive segments show that the Impact Score identifies managerially interpretable subgroups whose effect sizes (d = 0.16 to
4.28) range from small to very large.
Fig. 4. SHAP summary plot for the XGBoost termination model. TenureDays,
StartYear, and TenureVsAvg are the top drivers of termination risk.

Fig. 5. ROC curves for XGBoost termination prediction with and without
interaction features. Baseline and interaction-augmented models show nearidentical performance (AUC 0.835 vs. 0.845).

example, LR termination AUC is 0.800 [95% CI: 0.781,
0.817]; RF termination AUC is 0.836 [95% CI: 0.819, 0.851].
The narrow intervals (mean width ±0.018 across all metrics)
confirm that the 5-fold CV estimates are stable and the
conclusions are not artifacts of fold choice.

G. External Validation on IBM HR Dataset
Replicating on the IBM HR dataset [3] (1,470 records,
binary attrition) shows consistent results. The top interaction
is MonthlyIncome × JobLevel (impact 33.0, p < 10−300 ),
mirroring the compensation-related dominance in the synthetic
data. Model performance is comparable: XGBoost accuracy
0.852 ± 0.001 (synthetic) vs. 0.863 ± 0.010 (IBM); LR AUC
0.800 ± 0.020 vs. 0.780 ± 0.013. Interaction features produce
negligible accuracy change on both datasets, indicating the
finding is not dataset-specific.
The similarity in interaction structure and model performance across both datasets—despite different feature sets,
sample sizes, and outcome distributions—supports the generalizability of our framework. It also reinforces our central
finding that interaction effects, while real and interpretable,
typically provide modest predictive gains in workforce analytics settings.
While the previous section establishes the empirical findings, this section interprets their broader methodological and
practical implications.
V. D ISCUSSION
A. Key Findings
Our experimental results yield five key findings:
1. Explicit interaction engineering is redundant for tree
ensembles. The mean accuracy change from interactions is
+0.014 ± 0.014 (range: 0.000 to +0.048), with no configuration passing Wilcoxon at p < 0.05 on either dataset. Trees
capture interactions internally; the value lies in interpretability,
not prediction.

2. A heavy-tailed Pareto holds across outcomes. The top
54 pairs (3.1% of 1,755) drive 80% of total cumulative
impact—SeniorityLevel is most concentrated (7 pairs to 80%),
minority-department most diffuse (16 pairs). Targeted analysis
of the top 20–50 pairs captures most actionable insights.
3. Model families differ in interaction-handling behavior.
Logistic Regression shows the largest accuracy improvements from interaction features (Termination: +0.016, Minority Dept: +0.048), while Random Forest and XGBoost
show near-zero changes. This asymmetry indicates that linear
models require explicit interaction engineering while treebased ensembles capture interactions internally. Practitioners
using tree-based models should prioritize main effects and data
quality over interaction construction.
4. The PayZone paradox reveals the distinction between association and prediction. The strongest interaction (JobFamily
× DepartmentType, impact 181.3) corresponds to the worst
model accuracy (RF 0.328 vs. random baseline 0.333). Investigation reveals that zero of 23 supported combinations show
deterministic PayZone assignment—the interaction describes
population-level distributional differences, not individual-level
predictive signals. Strong statistical association does not imply
predictive utility.
5. External validation supports generalizability. Replicating
on the IBM HR dataset yields consistent interaction types
(compensation-related) and comparable model performance
(AUC 0.800 ± 0.020 synthetic vs. 0.780 ± 0.013 IBM). The
same negligible interaction-feature effect holds, indicating the
findings are not dataset-specific.
B. Comparison with Existing Work
Three analysis methods—the Impact Score, SHAP interaction values [15], and the Friedman H-statistic [8]—provide
complementary perspectives on interaction structure. The Impact Score measures statistical association before model training, while SHAP interaction values provide post-hoc, modelspecific interaction detection. Comparing both on the termination outcome reveals a Spearman rank correlation of ρ = 0.536
across all feature pairs—moderate alignment indicating that
each approach captures complementary aspects of interaction
structure.
The Impact Score identifies broader cross-feature interactions (e.g., Region × DepartmentType) that SHAP does
not rank highly, while SHAP emphasizes tenure-tenure interactions (e.g., TenureDays × TenureVsAvg) that have nearzero Impact Scores. This divergence is expected: Impact
Score measures outcome-dependent association across the full
dataset, while SHAP interactions reflect prediction-specific
contributions within a single trained model.
For three representative termination-model pairs whose features are numeric predictors in the Random Forest, we compute the Friedman H-statistic, which measures the proportion
of prediction variance attributable to interaction effects. All
three pairs show H-statistics exceeding 0.8: SeniorityLevel ×
IsIC (H=0.968), SeniorityLevel × IsManager (H=0.853), and

IsManager × IsIC (H=0.813), indicating substantial modelspecific interaction effects within the termination Random
Forest. The remaining high-ranked pairs involve categorical or
outcome-specific features absent from the termination model
(n = 12 configurations); full enumeration over all 1,755 pairs
is computationally expensive at scale, underscoring the Impact
Score’s advantage as a fast, model-agnostic screening tool.
The central finding—that statistically significant interactions
do not improve prediction—is itself a useful result. Interaction engineering is common practice: practitioners routinely
construct interaction terms expecting predictive gains. Our
evidence suggests this effort is unlikely to be worthwhile
for tree-based ensembles, which already capture interactions
internally through hierarchical splitting. For linear models,
interaction engineering can yield modest improvements and
should be guided by the Impact Score ranking rather than
exhaustive search. Publishing well-supported negative results
prevents unnecessary duplication of effort and provides a more
reliable foundation for cumulative scientific progress [22].
C. Limitations of the Interaction Impact Score
While the Impact Score satisfies the theoretical properties
established in Section III, it has important limitations that
affect its applicability:
High-cardinality features. The Impact Score relies on contingency table estimates of mutual information. When features
have high cardinality (e.g., 20+ distinct values), the number
of segments grows quadratically and per-segment support
decreases, inflating variance. In our data, the maximum segment count is 23 × 5 = 115 categories for JobFamily ×
DepartmentType, which is well-supported by 3,000 records.
For datasets with high-cardinality categoricals, pre-grouping
rare levels is recommended.
Continuous feature sensitivity. Features with many unique
continuous values (e.g., TenureDays with 1,200+ values)
require discretization before Impact Score computation.
The choice of binning strategy (equal-width, quantile, or
domain-specific) affects mutual information estimates. We use
quantile-based discretization with 10 bins, which provides
robustness across feature scales.
Outcome type restrictions. The score is designed for categorical and discretized outcomes. For purely continuous
regression targets, the outcome differential ∆ must be replaced
with an effect-size variant (e.g., Cohen’s d or standardized
mean difference), which we do not evaluate here.
Imbalanced segment detection. The log(n) weight ensures
singleton segments are excluded, but segments with 2 ≤ n <
10 may still produce noisy ∆ estimates. In our data, 12%
of Bonferroni-significant pairs have a minimum segment size
below 10. These pairs should be interpreted with caution and
validated against known organizational structure.
Prediction-utility gap. The most fundamental limitation:
the Impact Score measures population-level association, not
individual-level predictive utility. The PayZone paradox (Section IV) demonstrates that a score of 181.3 can coexist
with near-random classification performance. The score is

an interpretability tool, not a feature-selection criterion for
predictive models.
D. Practical Implications
For Practitioners: Interaction mining is valuable for
exploratory analysis, policy evaluation, and hypothesis
generation—the Impact Score prioritizes the few pairs that
matter from 1,755 candidates. Without it, an HR analyst would
need to manually inspect all 1,755 candidate pairs. With it
and Pareto filtering, the top 24 pairs (1.4%) capture 50% of
cumulative interaction impact and the top 54 pairs (3.1%)
capture 80%, reducing inspection effort by 96.9–98.6%. This
transforms a computationally intensive search into a targeted
analysis workflow. For predictive modeling with tree-based
ensembles, interaction engineering does not improve accuracy
(mean ∆ = +0.014 ± 0.014 across 12 configurations); organizations using RF or XGBoost should invest in main-effect
features, data quality, and class-imbalance handling instead.
If linear models are required (e.g., regulatory constraints), the
Impact Score provides principled interaction selection, and LR
with interactions can approach—but not match—tree-based
ensemble performance (Table VI).
For Researchers: The Impact Score offers a model-agnostic
screening tool for pre-model interaction discovery, complementing post-hoc methods such as SHAP interaction values.
Its key advantage is computational efficiency: scoring all 1,755
pairs requires seconds rather than the hours needed for full
model training on each candidate. The negative result documented here—that statistical significance does not guarantee
predictive utility—suggests that the HR analytics community
should prioritize interpretability-driven interaction mining over
prediction-driven approaches. Future work should extend this
framework to real-world organizational data, higher-order interactions, and fairness-aware interaction mining.
E. Worked Examples: Interaction Mining in Practice
To illustrate how the Impact Score translates into organizational decisions, we present three concrete scenarios grounded
in our discoveries.
Example 1: Pay Equity Audit. A compensation analyst
discovers that JobFamily × DepartmentType → PayZone has
the highest impact score (181.3). Drilling into individual
segments: Administrative staff in Sales departments are 33%
more likely to be in Zone A (lowest compensation band) than
the population average (d = 0.40, p = 0.057). This does
not improve prediction—classification remains near-random—
but it directly flags a specific department-family combination
for compensation review. An audit finds that these roles
lack a clear promotion track, leading to a market-adjustment
intervention. Without the Impact Score: 1,755 combinations
to inspect. With it: 1 interaction flagged, 1 policy change
implemented.
Example 2: Diversity Retention. The TenureYears ×
ExitQuarter → is minority dept interaction (impact 107.7,
d = 0.60, p = 0.005) reveals that employees with 5+ years of

tenure exiting in Q4 are disproportionately concentrated in departments where their gender is the minority. The mechanism:
Q4 exit timing correlates with bonus cycles, and minority employees in skewed departments show systematically different
retention patterns. The HR team uses this to design targeted
retention interviews for minority employees approaching the
5-year mark. Without the Impact Score: signal buried in 1,755
candidates. With it: actionable retention trigger identified.
Example 3: Career Path Design. The Leadership × Nonmanager → Seniority interaction (effect size d = 4.28, the
largest in this study) identifies experienced individual contributors (Seniority 4.0 vs. population 2.2) who lack management
responsibilities. This segment is invisible in standard reporting
because seniority and management are treated as separate
axes. The discovery enables the organization to formalize a
dual career track—management and technical leadership—
addressing a common source of attrition among senior ICs.
Without the Impact Score: no discovery mechanism. With it:
a new career framework.
These examples demonstrate the recurring pattern: the Impact Score enables discovery, Pareto filtering prioritizes action, and the organizational decision follows—independent of
whether prediction accuracy improves. These practical benefits
must be weighed against methodological limitations, which we
now assess systematically.
F. Threats to Validity
Internal validity (medium). Target leakage was corrected
via three exclusion rules (Section III). Five-fold CV and 10seed robustness analysis (±0.012 stability) reduce overfitting
risk. Synthetic data may introduce latent structure inflating
detection rates. Mitigation: leakage prevention, nested CV,
statistical testing, and external validation.
External validity (high). Findings rely on one synthetic
(3,000 records) and one public benchmark (IBM HR, 1,470
records). Consistency across datasets strengthens confidence,
but generalizability across sectors remains unverified. Mitigation: replication of key results on the IBM HR dataset.
Construct validity (medium). The Impact Score (Equation 1)
measures statistical association rather than predictive utility. Its
moderate alignment with SHAP interaction values (Spearman
ρ = 0.536) indicates that it captures related but distinct
interaction characteristics. The PayZone paradox further illustrates that strong statistical association does not translate
into predictive usefulness. Mitigation: comparison with SHAP
interaction values and Friedman H-statistic.
Statistical conclusion validity (low). Bonferroni-corrected
α = 0.05/1755. Ablation uses Wilcoxon and paired t-tests.
With n = 3,000, small effects may go undetected; 5-fold
CV provides only 5 paired observations per comparison. Mitigation: paired t-tests, Wilcoxon signed-rank tests, Bonferroni
correction, and effect-size reporting.
Key Takeaway: Interaction mining in workforce analytics is
valuable for interpretability and hypothesis generation, but
not for predictive improvement with tree ensembles. The
Impact Score prioritizes the few pairs that matter from 1,755

candidates, reducing inspection effort by 96.9–98.6%. Organizations using tree-based models should invest in main-effect
features, data quality, and class-imbalance handling rather than
interaction engineering.
G. Ethical Considerations
Workforce analytics carries ethical responsibilities. Models
trained on historical data may perpetuate existing biases,
and regular fairness audits across demographic groups are
essential. Transparency about model limitations, data provenance, and the distinction between population-level insights
and individual-level predictions is critical for maintaining
trust in algorithmic HR systems. Data-driven insights should
augment, not replace, human HR decision-making. The synthetic dataset used here removes privacy concerns, but realworld applications must follow informed consent principles
and ensure that employees understand how their data is
used. Privacy protections, including anonymization and access
controls, should be embedded into any deployment pipeline.
Acknowledgment

Long-term: The framework could be applied to healthcare,
finance, or education domains, where interaction effects between categorical features are similarly underexplored.
Reproducibility Statement
All experiments are fully reproducible. The pipeline was
implemented in Python 3.10+ using scikit-learn, XGBoost,
SHAP, and lifelines. Experiments were conducted on a
CPU-only workstation (Windows 11, 16 GB RAM) with
a total runtime of approximately five minutes. The primary random seed is 42 for all 5-fold stratified crossvalidation splits; robustness across seeds (0–9) is verified in
supplementary analysis. All data (synthetic and IBM HR)
and code are publicly available at the repository listed below. All configuration files, random seeds, processed outputs, and supplementary analysis scripts are included in
the repository to facilitate exact reproduction. Predictive
modeling results are reproduced via a single command:
python scripts/phase4_predictive_models.py
(phases 1–3 outputs are cached in the repository).

The author conducted this research independently and received no external funding, institutional support, or commercial sponsorship.

Data and Code Availability
All source code, experiment scripts, configuration files,
processed datasets, supplementary analyses, and documentation required to reproduce every reported result are publicly
available in the GitHub repository:

Conflict of Interest

https://github.com/Naydhurve3/WorkForce-Data-Analysis
under the MIT License.

The author declares no competing interests.

R EFERENCES
VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
This work addressed whether statistically significant feature
interactions provide measurable predictive value across workforce analytics tasks. Through exhaustive interaction mining
(1,755 pairs, 5 outcomes, 3 model families), we found that
statistical significance does not imply predictive usefulness.
Six principal findings emerge:
1) The strongest interaction—JobFamily × DepartmentType
→ PayZone—achieves impact 181.3. 2) Interaction effects are
heavy-tailed: 3.1% of pairs drive 80% of impact. 3) Explicit
interaction engineering is redundant for tree ensembles (mean
∆ = +0.014 ± 0.014, no Wilcoxon-significant configuration).
4) Tree-based models achieve comparable termination performance (RF AUC 0.836 ± 0.021, XGB 0.835 ± 0.018). 5)
The Leadership non-manager segment shows the largest effect
size (d = 4.28). 6) External validation on IBM HR confirms
consistent patterns.
A. Future Work
Highest priority: Validation on real organizational data
across sectors would strengthen generalizability. The framework should be tested on proprietary HR datasets with known
ground-truth interaction effects.
Medium priority: Three-way and higher-order interactions
remain unexplored and may reveal structure invisible to pairwise analysis. Fairness-aware interaction mining could detect
disparate impact across demographic groups, extending the
Impact Score framework to include fairness constraints.

[1] A. Fabris, N. Baranowska, M. J. Dennis, D. Graus, P. Hacker, J. Saldivar, F. Zuiderveen Borgesius, and A. J. Biega, “Fairness and bias in
algorithmic hiring: A multidisciplinary survey,” ACM Transactions on
Intelligent Systems and Technology, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 1–54, 2025.
[2] H. Talebi, A. Khatibi Bardsiri, and V. Khatibi Bardsiri, “Machine
learning approaches for predicting employee turnover: A systematic
review,” Engineering Reports, 2025.
[3] IBM, “IBM HR analytics employee attrition & performance,” Kaggle,
2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.kaggle.com/pavansubhasht/ibmhr-analytics-attrition-dataset
[4] S. De Vos, C. Bockel-Rickermann, J. Van Belle, and W. Verbeke,
“Predicting employee turnover: Scoping and benchmarking the stateof-the-art,” Business & Information Systems Engineering, vol. 67, no. 5,
pp. 733–752, 2025.
[5] S. S. Alduayj and K. Rajpoot, “Predicting employee attrition using
machine learning,” in 2018 International Conference on Innovations in
Information Technology (IIT). IEEE, 2018, pp. 93–98.
[6] M. I. Alyousef, H. W. Khan, and M. U. Sattar, “A hybrid predictive
model for employee turnover: Integrating ensemble learning and featuredriven insights from IBM HR analytics,” Information, vol. 17, no. 2, p.
208, 2026.
[7] M. Al Akasheh, E. F. Malik, O. Hujran, and N. Zaki, “A decade of research on machine learning techniques for predicting employee turnover:
A systematic literature review,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol.
238, p. 121794, 2024.
[8] J. H. Friedman and B. E. Popescu, “Predictive learning via rule ensembles,” The Annals of Applied Statistics, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 916–954,
2008.
[9] Y. Lou, R. Caruana, J. Gehrke, and G. Hooker, “Accurate and intelligible models of high-dimensional data,” Proceedings of the 19th ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining, pp. 623–631, 2013.
[10] R. Caruana, Y. Lou, J. Gehrke, P. Koch, M. Sturm, and N. Elhadad,
“Intelligible models for healthcare: Predicting pneumonia risk and
hospital 30-day readmission,” Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
pp. 1721–1730, 2015.

[11] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Machine Learning, vol. 45, no. 1, pp.
5–32, 2001.
[12] T. Chen and C. Guestrin, “XGBoost: A scalable tree boosting system,”
in Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2016, pp. 785–794.
[13] D. Sorokina, R. Caruana, M. Riedewald, and D. Fink, “Detecting
statistical interactions with additive groves of trees,” Proceedings of the
25th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 424–431, 2008.
[14] S. M. Lundberg and S.-I. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting model
predictions,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
vol. 30, 2017.
[15] S. M. Lundberg, G. Erion, H. Chen, A. DeGrave, J. M. Prutkin, B. Nair
et al., “From local explanations to global understanding with explainable
AI for trees,” Nature Machine Intelligence, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 56–67, 2020.
[16] M. Tsang, H. Liu, S. Purushotham, P. Murali, and Y. Liu, “Detecting
statistical interactions from neural network weights,” in International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018.
[17] M. M. A. A. M. Sony, M. B. Amin, A. Ashraf, K. M. A. Islam,
N. C. Debnath, and G. C. Debnath, “Bias in AI-driven HRM systems:
Investigating discrimination risks embedded in AI recruitment tools and
HR analytics,” Social Sciences & Humanities Open, vol. 12, p. 102082,
2025.
[18] T. G. Wingate, S. Rasheed, S. D. Risavy, and C. Robie, “How does
bias enter the employment interview? identifying the riskiest applicant
characteristics, interviewer characteristics, and sources of potentially
biasing information,” International Journal of Selection and Assessment,
vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 399–420, 2024.
[19] N. Mehrabi, F. Morstatter, N. Saxena, K. Lerman, and A. Galstyan,
“A survey on bias and fairness in machine learning,” ACM Computing
Surveys, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–35, 2021.
[20] M. Hardt, E. Price, and N. Srebro, “Equality of opportunity in supervised learning,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
vol. 29, 2016.
[21] C. Davidson-Pilon, “lifelines: survival analysis in Python,” Journal of
Open Source Software, vol. 4, no. 40, p. 1317, 2019.
[22] F. Karl, M. Kemeter, G. Dax, and P. Sierak, “Position: Embracing negative results in machine learning,” in Proceedings of the 41st International
Conference on Machine Learning, ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research, vol. 235. PMLR, 2024, pp. 23 256–23 265.

